                                                            
                                      Before You Say 'Yes!'
                        Critical Analysis of Dating and Marriage.

By Smith Collins, (Dr.)
All Right Reserved.
Under International Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reproduced in any form, either by any means of mechanical, electronic, photocopy, recording, lending or otherwise-without written permission from the author.

                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS

Dedication
Acknowledgment
Introduction

                                        Chapter One 
                                     Know Your Self
* If you are you can you marry you (self-examination) 
* Are you prepared?
* Have you count the cost?
* Have you acquired enough knowledge?
* Do you know what you want?

                                         Chapter Two
                               Now That You Are Ready
* What is Dating?
* What is Marriage?
* Things to work on before dating or marriage
                                        Chapter Three
                                        Love Detector
* Conditional Vs Genuine love
* What is love?
* Conditional love
* Genuine love
                                        Chapter Four 
                     Maintaining and Sustaining Relationship
* 7 Keys to a successful relationship

                                        Chapter Five
                                 Now That You Know
* Summary
About The Author

                                      DEDICATION
Dedicated to millions of children / teenagers around the world who were products of broken homes. To those who had loved and lost, hurt and frustrated by broken relationship and finally to those who are trapped in marriage, smiling with a broken heart. 
                                   ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I appreciate the efforts of my lovely wife Cynthia Smith, her love for me over the years has not diminished, is being renew every day. To my lovely kids Hellen and Jerry, dad always love you. 

                                       INTRODUCTION

One of the most powerful forces in the world is love between man and woman. Some people believe that it is the sweetest experience, while others are of the opinion that love is a facade hurtful, a charade, and some sort of a ghost chase. Love in their opinion is based on some selfish games and factitious conditions. But with time, these conditions fail and love becomes cold in the hearts of once professed lovers in which time tolerance is  now employed to help hold the union still; but, alas, even tolerance has a range and a limit, yes! The family will eventually collapse on a noon day. 
Though, there are ups and downs in love but the truth is: there is still genuine unconditional love. True love still exists without logistics.
Have you ever been in love? Have you ever woken up in the mid-night someday and could not sleep again because of the thoughts of someone out there? Have you loved someone that if you don't see his/her calls in a day, you could go crazy? Are you loving someone now and it means everything to you, so that saying he/she is no longer interested could make you commit suicide?
Love can be so interesting with sweet memories till death separates the lovers, but it could also turn life so miserable especially with the choice of a wrong partner. A lot of lives have been shattered this way, psychologically broken and emotionally warped. This is a dangerous situation because even divorce can never repair nor mend broken hearts. 
In this present time, nearly half of all relationships or marriages end up in divorce. This breeds far more bitter and frustrated spouses than ever before and in consequence, confused and depressed children are produced. If you are a teenager, a mature lady or young man who is anticipating to date or marry, there are very important qualities/assets you have to check in your partner to know whether he/she is the right person for you Before You Say 'YES'. People sometimes say: a broken relationship is better than a broken marriage. Even at that, I tell you, broken relationships leaves a bitter taste, emotional distress, fear and lose of interest to love again. That's why you have to get it right in dating or marriage. And this is what this book will teach you.
This book reveals the pitfalls you must avoid if you are dating, want to date or when you are about to marry. In this book, not only will you discovered the right choice of partner you want, but also, you will know if that person is someone you can have a lasting and better future with. Also, there are some useful tips for those (married couples) whose relationships are crashing down.
                                        
                                         Chapter One
                                      Know Your Self
Dating and marriage are phenomena that are common and which cut across cultures, peoples and races irrespective of their color or religion. Many young girls and boys, mature ladies and men rush into dating and marriage without an adequate knowledge. Some young people rush into marriage and they are trapped in it, not enjoying it and unable to go out of it.
In our world today, there are many unfortunate marriages that led to broken homes which produce depressed and frustrated children. And there are other marriages that do well. The truth is: some young men and ladies are better prepared before venturing into marriage than others.
Before you consider dating or marriage or the type of man or woman you want in your life, there are something you have to work on in your life. There are many questions you have to ask yourself: Do I really know myself? What do I want in my partner? What are my strengths and weaknesses? Am I ready to date or marry? Am I ready for change and to trade my privacy? All these we shall discuss to really know if you are ready for this life time change.
               Know Your Self (Self-examination)

1. /*If You Are You Can You Marry You? */ .

Many ladies and young men are too mean, dissident, rude, nagging, abusive and lots of other demeanors of a mere fledgling; yet they want someone that is a caring, good listening and loving partner. A bad tree cannot bear good fruits and neither can good fruits be the product of bad a tree: Each tree will always produce its kind; that is a law of nature and it applies to humans.
/* If you possess all kinds of bad attitudes you shouldn't expect mister right or virtuous lady to come your way…… (Feels like you are quarrelling with your reader whom you want to help. See how I modified it below)*/
If you possess many attributes unacceptable to your judgement, others will feel the same way about it too. It'd be exactly unkind to serve others wrong and expect them to serve you better - be ready to give whatever you may expect from others. There is one secrete worth knowing about this: when you are less prepared, you be attracted to the common sorts who share the same demeanors as you. If you know that you exhibit some unpalatable attitudes, work on this before venturing into dating or marriage.
Attitude is very important in life because it tells much about you, it is your identity. A proverb in Western Africa says, "character (attitudes) is like a smoke, no matter how hard you tried to conceal it, it will surely find a way out." No matter how hard you try to conceal your behaviors, you will surely reveal it someday; usually when you are provoked or when issues crop up. That's why you should first ask yourself, if you were the other person, would you marry someone like you. Would you tolerate your behaviors in other people's shells? This is a nice question to start with when you want to go far in your union. Therefore, you have to change your attitudes if bad, be disciplined and humble, don't be easily or unnecessary provoked, respect people and their opinions even if you don't agree with them. To change anything about yourself, you must first change your attitudes and your mindset, your general perception of people and things.
2. Are You Prepared?
Many a lady and young man forget the place of preparation when it comes to dating or marriage. Many don't prepare adequately before rushing to it, while the result is frustration and depression. All thing in life require adequate preparation and planning before its pursuit. No armies of any country would chose to wait till the war get to their doorsteps before they'll prepare. 
They train, prepare and get ready for the war beforehand. They don't learn how to shoot on the battle field, no, they learn it before the battle. No serious student who wants good grades would wait till exams period before he/she starts reading. All these point to the fact that adequate preparation is not just required but very important before marriage.
3. Have You Counted the Cost?
Who would want to build a house, and would not sit down first, do the calculations and know what it would cost before embarking on the project? Which business plan would someone want to pursue without considering the pros and cons therein? You must realize that dating or marriage will cost you......
* Time: are you ready to share your time with a partner?
* Privacy: are you ready to let go your privacy?
* Money: no partner wants to marry nor date a liability. You must also be ready to be a contributor in dating or in marriage. Are you ready to part some of your income to be a contributor and a help-meet?
4. Have you acquire enough knowledge?
Before a doctor can be certified or lawyer called into bar, they must have fulfilled all the requirements that revolves around the professions. Some young men and young ladies think when it comes to dating or marriage they don't have to acquire knowledge. They believe they can just hook-up with any partner and start a new life - it's a lot more than that!
If you have not sought for knowledge to understand the commitments, demands and sacrifices of marriage and relationship, you may not really understand what you are getting yourself into. Many marriages fail and many relationships partners were frustrated and depressed because they were never prepared for it. Marriages and relationships are more than finding just a partner to hook-up with.
I have met many young men and ladies who never read a single book about marriage or relationship, yet they anticipate the fantasy and aura of a perfect union. They never had the idea of what they are getting into, some do that only to blame themselves afterwards.
If there is something that require adequate preparation in life, relationship and marriage is one of them because when you marry a wrong partner what you have built over the years or about to build like your visions, dreams, career or plans would be shattered. It should be noted that successful marriage or relationship is the product of adequate preparation and not by chance.
Therefore, if you are mature and ready to date or marry you must acquire knowledge. How do you acquire adequate knowledge? These are the ways to acquire it:
* Through your parents. Parents would welcome the consultation of a mature boy or girl about dating and marriage. They'll be happy to share their wealth of experience and things to expect.
* Consult successful married couples who have traveled the road. Their wealth of experience about marriage will give you insights to what relationship and marriage is all about. They'll be happy to share with you their experiences and their ups and downs in marriage. 
* Get as many books about relationship and marriage as you can. There are many good books about marriage and relationship, buy and read them. Most of the writers are marriage counselors and some share their personal experiences. There are so many proven result, successful family life books and testimonies of successful marriage books you can buy. Get them and acquaint yourself the knowledge of relationship and marriage.
* Attend relationship and marriage seminars. There are many seminars organized to sensitize the young and mature people about relationship and marriage. Make enquiries about marriage or relationship as this will help you gain knowledge of them.
* However, if you are a religious person, pray to your God for His guidance in choosing a partner. 
 All said and done. When you acquire adequate preparation, insight and knowledge of relationship and marriage, the right partner will show up and you'll be able to choose the right one. Friend, take time to learn how to swim before you dived. Marriage is a school one never graduated from, that's why every mature young person needs to be adequately prepared. 
5. Do you know what you want?
Many young men and ladies don't even have the idea of what they want. Ask them the type of partners they want, the qualities they want to see in their man or woman, his assets and the kinds of character they want him/her to exhibit and they would stand scratching their head . . . too bad! They will not be able to give answers to these questions while many others who would will give very vague answers.
Choosing someone to date or a life partner goes beyond handsomeness, beauty, appearance, dollars in his wallet or in her purse, or because he or she comes from a rich and reputable family. All these don't guarantee love, peace and happiness in relationship and marriage. You must be able to specify the qualities you want in your lady or in your man. Write them down and, be sincere and truthful to yourself.
Remember, I told you earlier to work on your weaknesses before you look for Mister perfect or industrious and virtuous lady, because if you exhibit bad qualities, don't expect Mister or Miss right. In your list, here are some example of quality tips that will help you chose right. Look for someone who is:
* Morally upright
* Friendly in nature
* Goal oriented / Goal driven / a visionary
* Faithful and trustworthy
* Good appearance (neatness)
* Jovial (thoughtful)
* Spiritually minded if you're a religious person.
You must look beyond physical traits or outward appearance in choosing your partner because beauty/handsomeness is deceptive, he/she might be good looking but morally bad and pervert. As a young mature person who is ready for dating or marriage, another important area which you have to consider before you date, maybe you're probably dating or before marriage are itemized below.
* Whose company does he/she keep (his/her friends)?
* What are his/her target goals/vision/dreams?
* Is he/she is an industrious person?
* How does he handle situations / problems? Or little authority he/she has?
* How does he/she treat his/her family / his/her attitudes towards others?
* How does he handle money?
* Is he/she financially stable or often run into debts / he/she is responsible?
* Is he/she well-spoken of or an ill-mannered?
* Is he/she is always angry and violent?
* Is he/she is verbally or physically abusive?
* What gives him/her joy and from where does he/ she enjoy a good time?
* Is he/she self-centered or considerate?
Consider thoroughly the aforementioned points to know the qualities your partner possesses. Don't say you'll change him or her, no one can change others in their way of thinking. Don't say I'll change his or weaknesses when I marry her or marry him, you can't always do so. The truth is that, we all have some pride in us and we will never respond to constructive criticisms of others unless we determine to change ourselves. You cannot change your partner. If he/she can't change now, he/she won't change during dating or marriage.
NOTE:
If you know that your future is very important to you and you want happiness throughout the rest of your life, you want to enjoy every bit of your relationship or marriage, have good kids, enjoying vacations and living the life you dream; then I crave your indulgence, don't allow your feelings to overpower your reasoning. If you fall in love blindly without cautions, you may overlook most of our important discussions so far; for your emotions and feelings can easily and quickly overpower your reasoning.
Don't allow your emotions, feelings and bias judgements to override your good judgements of the choice of the partner you want in your life. Don't yield to the pressure and advances of someone who is not right for you, that can derail you and make your life miserable.
However, don't allow others, either friends or family to pressure you to date or marry when you are not ready. And neither you should pressure yourself. You must have acquired basic knowledge of friendship and get matured enough. Go for someone who share the same belief, ideology and future plans with you. Don't be desperate, don't listen to your emotions, feelings or pressure but follow your heart and be sincere with yourself because no one will bear the consequences except you.

                                             Chapter Two
                                  Now That You Are Ready
Now that you have examined and know who you are and what you what in your partner. Are you about to date, dating already, want to go into marriage or you're already married? Adjust your seat and let's dive into the realm of love and courtship in this chapter.
What Is Dating?
Dating is a mutual Agreement of friendship between two people of opposite sex. It is a romantic activity between a young man and young woman, a man and a woman whose romantic interests and attention focused on each other’s whether in open or secret.
Dating precede marriage and it helps the opposites sex to be well acquainted with each other. Dating helps the young people to determine for themselves if they are compatible before going into marriage. Many cultures in the parts of the world approve dating in order for their young men and women to become better acquainted before marriage.
Therefore, don't date if you're not ripe or prepared for it because it involves feelings and emotions. Don't play with fire, I believe you wouldn't want another person to hurt your feelings, which could bring depression, so don't hurt others. In dating each opposite sex feelings are being affected, so be sincere, honorable and ready before dating.
At What Age Should I Date?
I strongly believe it is the "bloom of the youth," that is, when you are mentally, physically and emotionally matured. If you are not, don't rush into dating. So many people who went into dating break up few weeks after because they don't have the slightest idea of what they are going into. I believe you wouldn't want yours to be the same.
What Is Marriage?
Marriage is a formal union of two opposite sex, a man and a woman coming together as couple. It is two party’s agreement that involves vows or sealed with an oath and witness by relatives or gathering of many people. 
Here we'll discuss extensively what marriage is all about.
1. Is a covenant / vow / oath of togetherness.
"I Robert, take you, Cynthia, to be my lawfully wedded wife or husband, to have and to hold, from this day forward, for better for worse, richer or poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and to cherished, till death do us part." Millions of people, young men and women make marriage vows every week across the world without deep thoughts and considerations of what they are getting themselves into. After few months of marriage, they realized that they are not compatible and they file for divorce.
Marriage is a covenant and a promise that husband and wife made for each other to live under the same roof till the rest of their lives. If you are not ready to bind yourself with an oath or covenant to remain with her or with him, don't go into marriage.
2. Is a Companion
A companion is a person with whom one shares time or vacations with. He/she is a person that complements us, who we share our privacy and secrecy with. It is a person that we share the same interests, moments of happiness, sorrows, burdens and success with.
Many couples are not enjoying their marriage because they are not companions, though they live together but they are total stranger to each other. Some only share marriage bed while others simply share separate rooms. No marriage will survive if couple share separate interests. Marriage will only survive if the couple possess the mind of companionship, similar interests and willingness to respect each other. That is why the young people out there should carefully choose someone who will bear each other's burdens.
3. Family foundation
There wouldn't be family without marriage. A legally married couple constitutes a family. Marriage is a bedrock in which family rest. It is the foundation in which family is build. The fruits of a constituted marriage are the children it produces and the children are members of the family.
Marriage built on deception and not of mutual and similar interests will crash down.
4. For procreation, intimacy and affections
As regards to some opinions of Americans and other European countries that marriage is not necessary for procreation, I still believe that one of the purposes of marriage is to procreate. It is the process by which we replenish our world. And to bring children into this world, it's still the only natural way.
Intimacy is having a close relationship, knowing someone as the palm of your hands. Someone you have intimacy with whom you share your problems and success with. Affection is the ingredient that spice intimacy, caring and loving for your companion.
5. For sexual pleasure
In marriage sex is legal and binding, and it is designed by God to satisfy the couple's sexual pleasure. Sex is not a sin in marriage but outside marriage it is called (un-faithfulness) cheating, and I believe you wouldn't want to cheat on your husband or wife. 
Sex produces strong intimacy and strengthens love in marriage. Sex is very important in marriage and if the partner denies each other of this, the relationship will be doomed. All these are what marriage is all about.
THINGS TO WORK ON BEFORE DATING AND IN MARRIAGE
1. Cultivate Good Character 
Check your demeanor, you know yourself more than anyone. Are you humble, tolerant, free-minded, patient and calm during pressure; or you are the type that is mean, antagonistic, jealous and always insists in doing things in your own way. You have to cultivate good character to be able to enjoying dating or marriage.
2. Work On Your Appearance
No one would want to date or marry a dirty and stinking fellow, who doesn't know how to take care of his or her body. If you want to be attracted to the opposite sex, or the right partner, you must know that your appearance matters. You must learn how to dress and work smart. As a man
(husband) you must learn color combination, wash your teeth, comb your hair and stylish it, be neat and tidy. Be friendly and let your conversation be gracious. 
As a lady (wife), you must be neat and unruly; stylish your hair, be soft-spoken, friendly, thoughtful, brush your teeth and learn how to cook. Most young men and ladies were turn-down by their suitors because of these little things. 
Whether you are dating or married, you must know that your appearance matters. You should make good looks a priority.
3. Have A Good Relationship
Do you use sarcastic languages when you get angry or in order to make your points? Do you treat people, friends and family in a better and well behaved way? Do you sometimes lose control and talk harshly to anyone around you? If you exhibit one or two of these traits, am afraid you will not meet the right partner because people will avoid you.
Inter-personal relationship matters a lot and good rapport will make people want to come near you. Good relationship with others is your identity that will single you out among the packs.
4. Be Financially Prudent
Do you often find yourself in debts? Do you often buy things you never really need? Do you handle money wisely?   What are the things that always take money from you? How about your job? Do you take it serious? If you are not financially prudent you will always find yourself in debt. If you live from hand to mouth you will never save for the rainy day.
As a man or woman you are to be of help to your partner. You have to invest and contribute financially to the relationship. If you don't know how to handle money, how will you handle your finances and manage your family. And no one would want to entrust their hard earned money to
you. You must look inwards and know that thing that always extort money from you and checkmate it. Save for rainy days.  This will help you to make a good partner.
NOTE:
As I close this chapter you must understand that both dating and marriage are similar, and being pressured to it before you are ready or prepared would be like being forced to battle without adequate training. By studying your partner before or during dating and marriage would revealed the types of problems you are going to face in the marriage.
Therefore, have it at the back of your mind that the union of two people that are not compatible will produce bad relationships while compatible two good friends will produce good dating or good marriage. Build yourself a solid and functional relationship.                 
                                              Chapter Three
                                              Love Detector
Conditional Vs Genuine Love
In a world full of deceptive people and deceptive love, how do we find true and genuine love. Many young men and women had loved and lost. Many fall to deception, believing they had met the right person only to discover later that it was never meant to be and they just have to let go, and both go their separate ways.
Many who had loved and lost through deceptive partners never recovered from the trauma. They felt hurt, disappointed, cheated and betrayed. Because of this, some people conclude that what we call love is a mirage and dummy facade, an attraction that fades with time, a pure trade by barter and exchange of obligation.
WHAT IS LOVE?
To say the truth love cannot be defined because we cannot all arrive at an agreeable definition. I believe that many people will agree with me that love is a very strong affection; a romantic feeling that one has for the opposite sex. 
There are five types of love l shall briefly explain to really ascertain what love is and what is not.
FIVE TYPES OF LOVE
1. Mania (Obsessed Love)
I must own that this kind of love, even 'lust' is not the right word to describe it. It is the love for material possession or anything that appease to the eyes. It is the love for worldly possessions or fame and the perfect example to describe this is the craziness or madness to obtain everything.
2. EROS (Egoistic Love)
This type of love says, "My first and last"
consideration is myself." This is the root word for "erotic." This is not only sexual love but all kinds of sensual feelings that sweep over people. This is a promiscuous love and any partner that possesses it will never be faithful to their partner as they will have many relationships outside marriage. It is a kind of sinful love.
3. PHILIA (Mutualistic Love)
It says, "I will give as long as I received." This type of love is brotherly / friendship love. It grows half in half about the circumstances and commitments of each friends. However, it keeps on growing except when betrayal sets in. It is a love that demands interests.
4. STORGE (Motherly Love)
Best of love. This type of love says, "I love you because you are mine." This is the love between man and woman. It involves commitment of two people who have agreed to be together, for example: marriage. It is a natural love that demands nothing, like father to daughter or mother to son.
5. AGAPE (Altruistic Love)
Best of love. This is unselfish love, it says, "I will give, requiring nothing in return." This type of love requires no payment of favor in return. This love creates a straight line that neither fade in dating or marriage. This love is freely given in the heart of such lover and freely committed to.
It is a sacrificial love, even the lack of input from other partners (recipient) makes it possible for the lovers to keep on loving still even though they are not satisfied with their actions.
Having considered these types of love, you might be thinking, how can I know the type of love that man or that lady has before I'll say yes to him or her. I shall discuss both conditional and genuine love below.
CONDITIONAL LOVE
Conditional love as the name infer is the love with conditions. Conditional love is the love that one has for someone because of goodness, sexual feature, career, moral standard, money and so on. This is what is known as fake love because this type of love is an attraction that fades as soon as that features the person got attracted to ceases to exist.
There are many reasons people fall in love but those reasons should not be attached with outward appearance or material things, what will happen if such features get missing with years? Automatically the love will fade. That is why love vanishes between couples that once professed to love each other’s because it is just an attraction.
Therefore, if your partner is saying I love you because of this or that, make sure to ask him or her if those things he likes or she likes vanish with time will the love still be there. Love should be natural with convictions from the heart and not for what one will get from it or personal perspectives.
Before you go into marriage or dating you must try to find out or ask your partner why he or she wants you as a spouse or date. If he or she gives you vague answers or the answers are based on physical appearance or material things, you don't need a seer to tell you the facts of his or her love; am afraid such loves might not last. Check the previous discussions about five types of love and know which category your (intended) man or woman falls. Don't allow your feelings and emotions to dictate to you but be patient enough to study your partner before you say yes!
GENUINE LOVE
Genuine love is the natural perfect love that comes from the heart. Genuine love is the love that grows stronger with the years. It is the love that is attached to nothing, it is not attached with conditions, it looks beyond perfection. 
Genuine love makes one perfect even if the person has weaknesses; it makes one trust even when we have lots of reasons to doubts, and casts out fears. It is sacrificial and unselfish, it stands in the face of persecutions and trials, and loves till death.
One may ask, can we still find true and genuine love? I strongly believe that there is still genuine love out there. Though, the word love and relationship has been misconstrued and plenty of fake lovers and heart-breakers have made genuine love to be rare. That is why I said it earlier in this book that if you are cunning and unfaithful person, don't expect humble, quiet, and caring partner. Life will always give back to you what you invest or sow into it. 
Love is sweet, having family is so interesting, raising kids and seeing them grow up is a beautiful experience if you meet the right partner. Hence, meeting a wrong partner is disheartening, frustrating and miserable. That is why you have to get it right at first.                    
                                           Chapter Four
                    Maintaining and Sustaining a Relationship
Love is not the only thing that sustains relationships, there are some basic things that go along with love before any relationship, whether dating or marriage can be successful.
As a marriage counsellor with wealth of experience over the years, I have counseled many couples who loved each other but still struggle with their (relationship) marriage. What seems to be paramount among these people is not because they don't love each other but they are simply not getting along with each other. And as they can't get along with each other, misunderstanding sets in. That is why in this chapter I want to explain certain things that maintains and sustains relationships. These things are as follow:
1. Open and Clear Communication
One of the principles that can sustain a relationship is having open and clear communication. Communication is sharing, conveying or exchanging of information. One of the things that make humans superior to other creations is the ability to be able to speak to others in a clear understandable language, we can decode and encode.
In a relationship the couple must be able to speak their mind in a clear understandable way. If there are issues each of them has, it must be communicated and addressed. If the issues are becoming piled up, it will develop resentments and of which it will only make them bitter. And this can do a great damage in a relationship. If issues are address on time it will save the relationship and the couple will enjoy their union. There must be clear and open communication.

2. Good Listener and Undivided Attention
One of the menaces that destroys relationship is inability of the partners to listen to each other. Many of us don't even need someone to pity or advise us rather someone who will listen and give us undivided attention as we narrate our undue stress of the day.
If the wife is trying to tell her husband the stress and problems she passed through during the day and the husband doesn't want to listen to such stories, there will be problems. Women need and value it when a man listens and give them undivided attention. This is what men have to know. The husband must realize that women like details, they want to know every details of something. If you denied her as a husband, she'll feel disappointed.
The wives must also realize that men like News in brief, they only want the headlines. Give them the headlines of the stories and they'll calculate what transpired in the stories. Men don't like details like women because they are very calculative.
Therefore, husband and wife should understand each other's nature. Men like News in brief, they are calculative and logical; why women like details of everything and are emotional. No one should scold the other because of this, that's the way both men and women are wired. This principle should be maintained, because being a good listener strengthens all relationships.
3. Understanding and Awareness
One of the most important ways to preserve your relationship is to understand your partner. Some couples cannot even figure out what their wife or husband likes or hates. Some couples are insensitive to the feelings of their partners. They overlook some little things that count of which their partner value and cherish.
Study your partner, pay closer attention to him or her; know what he or she needs. Give him or her your undivided attention, learn to know when your partner wants to be alone and when he or she wants long conversations. Make your partner's life better by understanding his or her body language. 
Understand your partner's weaknesses and strengths. Try to help him or her fill that void. Be sensitive, study your partner and give him or her what he or she likes, wants or needs and not what you like, want or need.
4. Accountability, Openness and Transparency 
Accountability is very important in a relationship. It has to do with "account for anything you do". By being accountable, is to explain actions and decisions, whether a description of an events or a record explanation of money spent or received, or plans and schedules one made.
To strengthen your relationship, you have to be open to your partner in everything you do. Sharing your plans, schedules, money spent, places visited, friends you meet and etc., this strengthens your relationship, it instils trust and transparency; it indirectly tells others that you are open, transparent, you value and respect them and that you have nothing to hide.
This if practiced, will give your partner a sense of value and togetherness. There must be transparency amongst couples as this will go a long way to instill belief and trust in a relationship. Speak the truth in love and hide nothing from your partner. Don't give room to suspicious attitudes.
5. Build Good Relationship and Friendship
Another vital area which strengthens and makes relationships lasting and enjoyable is by building good friendships. Here many couples fall short. They don't care about each other's friends, family and relatives even when one of them comes
around they show no care. This is bad, it sends wrong signals to the partner because they may assume that the partner doesn't care how his or family fares.
Some people bring problems to their partners because of their attitudes towards their neighbors. If couples constantly get negative reports of their partner, it is bad and that
relationship is at risk because there will be complaints and arguments among the couples. And you know what complaints and arguments do? It harbors resentments, strive, bitterness and problems which can actually crash the relationship. 
Build good relationship with your partner, tell jokes to your partner, play games with each other, do shopping with him or her; go to vacations together, smile always and tell him or
her that you really love him and that you appreciate his/her companionship. Give each other good compliments. Sometimes, what sustains and maintain relationship is the relationship the couples built together.
Also, take genuine interests in other people, be friendly. Know people's feelings, care and love people.
6. Patient and Respect
In any relationship there is need to be patient with people, dating and marriage is not an exception. Patience is the ability to accept delay or trouble calmly, it is the ability to be at ease even when you want to know more of something or in need of something from someone.
Patience is very important as you would have to tolerate your partner. Don't hurry your spouse, don't push him or her too hard to do something, this might look like you are over stressing him or her; but wait for him or her to do that thing at his or her convenient time or of his/her own accord.
Let there be respect for each other. Give some respect to your wife, treat her like your Queen, seek for her advice and make her your best investment. Wife should also reciprocate by giving her husband due respect, making him your one and only King; respect his judgments, plan along with him and let him realize that he is the best husband in the whole world. Do not abuse each other, no murmuring or negative words. Be patient and respect your partner.
7. Money and Finance
Another thing which pose serious threats to a relationship is finance. Lack of money in a relationship can wreak havoc. Money is very important in a relationship like the air we breathe.
Lack of enough fund can affect marriage, because it will be very difficult for any man to manage his home. Partners must have means of livelihood; each must have a job so that they can be of help to each other.
The man must be able to provide for his family, prudent in spending and knowing to allocate resources in a way that it will not end in debts. The wife also must be supportive, assisting the family by contributing to it. However, it is very important for the couple to be open (transparent) to each other concerning the money they earn at work.
Therefore, the couple must adopt investment mentality, both of the partners must be able to utilize, invest and manage their finances well so that they can be able to sponsor their kids, giving them qualitative education and able to leave inheritance for their children.
NOTE:
If all aforementioned points above are practiced, not only will you enjoy your relationship but it will last till both of you grow old. Dear reader, love is not all in all in marriage but what I have discussed here will sustain the love from fading and maintain the relationship.                     
                                             Chapter Five
                                      Now That You Know
Now that you know all the rudiments of dating and marriage in this book, are you going to explore all you have learnt, or read and never take any meaningful step? I want the reader to realize that taking responsibility and seizing opportunities in life is a sure way to success in all spheres of life. If you miss it in the area of choosing a life partner, it will affect all areas of your life.  Even if divorce is considered and filed, it could cast negative effect on someone's life. And if you decide to stay in the turbulent relationship, you will not find the joy of marriage.
Dating and marriage is not like supermarket where you can do shopping and go back home feeling happy. There wouldn't be any excuse if you end up with a wrong partner and live a miserable life after reading this book. That is why you have to choose right. Below is the summary of what we discussed so far.
Summary:
* Before dating or marriage you must know:
-who you are
-your weaknesses,
-prepare adequately
-count the cost
-acquire dating or marriage knowledge
-know what you want.
* Dating is for mature people and mature minds. Don't date if:
-you are not matured physically and emotionally
-if you are not prepared for it (it involves feelings and emotions. 
*Marriage is:
-a formal union of two opposite sex, it is an agreement made and sealed with vows.
-It is a companionship
-a family foundation
-for procreation, intimacy and affection
* Four things to work on, in/before dating or marriage:
-cultivate good character
-work on your appearance
-have a good relationship
-be financially prudent
* Five types of love:
-Mania (obsessed love)
-Eros (egoistic love)
-Philia (mutualistic love)
-Storge (motherly love)
-Agape (altruistic love)
Conditional love is the love that is attached with conditions and fades as soon as those features are not there anymore. Genuine love is the love without conditions. It is the natural perfect love that comes from the heart.
* Maintaining and sustaining relationships require:
-clear and open communication
-good listening and undivided attention
-understanding and awareness
-accountability, openness and transparency
-build good relationship and friendship
-money and finance.
It should be noted that in every relationship (marriage or dating) there will be ups and downs, even love sometimes sap at a point in time, but what will keep the relationship going in time of crisis is the love and friendship the partner has built over the years.
So dear, don't date or marry because the person is handsome and tall, beautiful with promising career; someone can possess these and yet become a failure. In contrast, someone can be short and not handsome or beautiful, even with
less education, yet become successful. What you see like outward appearances shouldn't be your yardstick in choosing a life partner.
Don't date or marry because of riches or wealth, it can fade; not even career, it does not necessarily determine successful life. Don't go for looks, it deceives; rather marry someone who will make you happy and smiles always because it will take only someone you love to make you have brighter days and happy in times of challenges. As writer said, "go for someone who makes you smile because it takes only a smile to make a dark day seem bright." (Jordan Smith).
                                  ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Dr. Smith Collins is an educationalist, a life coach, motivational speaker and entrepreneurial. He holds seminars, writes and teaches on success principles, leadership, having a successful (marriage) relationship, self-discovery, releasing one's potentials etc.
He is happily married to Cynthia Smith with two lovely children.
                                                  Contacts
You can reach me through mail: smithcollins@yahoo.com. Please, all suggestions are welcomed. You can also drop your review where you purchase this book if you enjoyed it. 
You can also buy my other book: 'The Positive Mind.' Your mind is the seat of all thoughts. It is a battle ground, a place where success or failure are determined.
Lookout for my subsequent eBooks.
