MY REVIEW OF THE BOOK "BEFORE YOU SAY YES".   DATE: 18Th, October 2016




			COMMENDATIONS

First, I must own that this release is a work of talent and intelligence. It is a release from experience and a practical knowledge of natural psychology. I have for a long time hoped to think towards the direction of family life. It bothered me to think about the fusses that surround the simple word LOVE. As a man that hates to live with things just for the heck of it, I dreamed of a time to explore it, during which I shall have answers to my questions about it. But over the years afterwards, unknowing it, I began to see most of my answers come by on their own. I knew that this subject holds something crucial to life, nature and existence. I just didn’t know what it was. 

Today, I’m happy that in your release, I have not only seen a synchrony of some of the answers I got but also gained some more insights to the subject. I want to tell you that you are talented, may be you still hold some doubt about it. I hate to lie or tell people they are good when they are not: I’d rather tell them they can do better or the likes. In your own case, I sincerely remind you that there is something in you we need so much in the world. If you get discouraged in the long run, we all lose, sad! It is sad because, I believe you are representing the last available specimen of the exact you. Please hold still; don’t fail your God, He won’t fail you.

However, I would like to point out some very important factors that are missing in this project.

		YOUR PLACE IS MISSING

You are a writer whom God called to save the world with your pen. You are a co-laborer with Jesus in His vineyard where the field is the human community. I searched the place of this fact throughout the book but found none. How do you ratify the fact that a minister of the New Covenant is teaching unmarried people how to commit sin? Openness of privacy among unmarried opposite sex leads to sinful activities. You know that, don’t you? Do you do that yourself? Can you answer for these people’s souls if they land in hell? What were you thinking?

		DATING IS A WRONG WORD

Much as I blamed you, I sincerely believe that you have a hard message in your heart you want the people of the world to hear. Let’s square it together: remove every occurrence of the word DATING and all related inferences. Your target is the HOME, isn’t it? Then, you’d need a little more work on the project before it can answer your name. 

          RESTRUCTURE THE WORK
The book is currently teaching about dating for the intent of marriage. This dating will lead them to commit fornication. Bring the idea home to something about unaffectedly relationships that lead to marriage. Talk more about courtship possibilities without sin. It might look a little harder to explain without scriptures yet but I’m sure you can do it well. Be the ambassador of zero sex before marriage in your book and make it work.  

           A BREAK_DOWN OF MY ADVICE

1. Make the book BEFORE YOU SAY YES work without sex, dating or sinful acts in the relationships.
2. Define every controversial word before use not after. You actually defined dating in chapter two but you’ve been using it beforehand. 
3. If you quote someone’s speech, write their name, it is the convention. 
4. Your chapter two may need more work than others as it contains more of the word dating than any other chapter of the book



CONCLUSION
Even without the idea based on Dating and any of its word variations, the book still retains its beauty. Please, restructure it from the start to convey your exact message and still be able to answer your name.



Michael C. Iyke
